# Downloading and Installing IrFanView

1.  Navigate to <https://www.irfanview.com> with your web browser (e.g.,
    Google Chrome) and click on the "Download" tab (see screenshot
    below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image1.jpeg){width="6.138888888888889in"
height="3.3433333333333333in"}

2.  Download and install the 64-bit version of IrFanView to your system.
    Select the correct version for your operating system (e.g., MacOS,
    Windows) (see screenshot below).

> ![Graphical user interface, text, application Description
> automatically
> generated](./docs/protocols/media/image2.png){width="6.175180446194226in"
> height="3.329714566929134in"}

3.  The download may re-direct you to another web page to download
    IrFanView and it might start an automatic download of IrFanView. If
    an automatic download does not start, select the correct 64-bit
    installer for your operating system (see screenshot below).

![Graphical user interface, text, website Description automatically
generated](./docs/protocols/media/image3.png){width="5.8855610236220475in"
height="3.173549868766404in"}

4.  You will be prompted to install the software on your machine. Click
    "Allow Changes" to proceed with the software installation. (Note:
    you will need administrator access to install this application).

5.  Proceed with the software installation using the IrFanView
    installation wizard (see screenshot below).

> ![](./docs/protocols/media/image4.jpeg){width="3.236111111111111in"
> height="3.230180446194226in"}

# Setting IrFanView as Your Default Image View (Optional)

6.  You can optionally set IrFanView as your default image viewer. This
    will cause your system to automatically launch IrFanView when you
    double-click on a photo.

> 6a. Navigate to the "Windows Settings" on your machine and then click
> on "Apps" (see screenshot below- please forgive my dark mode in
> Windows 10)

![](./docs/protocols/media/image5.jpeg){width="6.4984405074365705in"
height="3.53744750656168in"}

6b. On the "Apps & features" screen, click on the "Default apps" tab
(see screenshot below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image6.jpeg){width="6.516155949256343in"
height="3.547090988626422in"}

6c. On the "Default apps" screen, select IrFanView as your default
viewer (see screenshot below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image7.jpeg){width="6.486831802274716in"
height="3.5311286089238845in"}

#  Selecting Photo Assignments on Basecamp

7\. To select a photo assignment on Basecamp, go the "To-dos" section
under the "Camera Studies" project.

8\. Under the "Sorting Assignments" section of each project, click to
the right of each assignment (e.g., Sort BGW_04182019_05212019 in the
screenshot below) and then add your name beside the assignment. In the
screenshot below, you can see that Elizabeth E. has their name beside
the assignment "Sort WCS_07032019_09182019 \[check for upload\]".

![](./docs/protocols/media/image8.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.504861111111111in"}

9\. Generally, we ask that assignments be completed with 2 weeks are
they are self-assigned. Andrew or Brandon will contact you to check on
the progress of each assignment if you go past that 2-week window. If
you fail to turn in an assignment within a month, your name will be
removed from that assignment and the assignment will be given to someone
else.

# Sorting Photos Using IrFanView

10. Open the sub-folder of photos (e.g., 100EK113) you are going to sort
    in Windows Explorer (see screenshot below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image9.jpeg){width="5.9475207786526685in"
height="3.237551399825022in"}

11. Double-click on the first photo in the folder. This should
    automatically launch IrFanView (if you set it as your default image
    viewer in step 6). OR you can right click on the first image, choose
    "Open with" and then choose "IrFanView 64 bit") (see screenshot
    below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image10.jpeg){width="6.023470034995626in"
height="3.2752613735783025in"}

11\. IrFanView automatically recognizes all the images in a folder, so
you can flip through images in the folder with the arrow keys on your
keyboard.

It is highly recommended that enter full-screen mode when you sort
photos so you can see small changes in each image. You can enter
full-screen mode by double-clicking on an image when it is already open
in IrFanView, or by hitting the enter key on your keyboard.

Additionally, it is also recommended that you setup "Full Screen Only-
Show Text" which can be configured to display the pathway to each image
(i.e., the location of each image on your computer) and how many images
are left to sort in folder (and other settings you might find useful).
To do this, first click the "Preferences" tool icon on the IrFanView
toolbar (see screenshot below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image11.jpeg){width="6.479166666666667in"
height="5.4706036745406825in"}

12\. The "Preferences" window will open. Click on the "Full Screen /
Slideshow" option on the left-hand side. Then setup your "Full Screen
Only" preferences similar to the screenshot below. Text in the
bottom-left seems to work well as it doesn't cover up potentially useful
areas in each image. (Note: you may have to adjust the font size and
color depending on your personal preferences).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image12.jpeg){width="4.865241688538933in"
height="5.080431977252843in"}

13\. Now when you open an image in Full-Screen mode, you should see some
text in the bottom left-hand side that tells you the location of the
image on your machine and how many photos remain in the folder (in the
screenshot below: 4/999).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image13.png){width="6.479166666666667in"
height="3.644530839895013in"}

13b. IrFanView allows you to "Tag" images when you flip through them. To
tag an image simply hit the "X" key on your keyboard. IrFanView will
temporarily tag the image, denoting tagged images with an X alongside
the text you setup in the "Full Screen Only" options (see screenshot
below).

*Note: Image tags will disappear if you close IrFanView in the middle of
an image folder. It is highly recommended that complete at least 1
sub-folder (e.g., 100EK113) during a photo sorting session.*

![A picture containing graphical user interface Description
automatically
generated](./docs/protocols/media/image14.jpeg){width="6.479166666666667in"
height="3.644530839895013in"}

14\. **Tag all photos with subjects** (i.e. all of the images with
something in it; see the "Wild Horse Camera Trap Sorting and Scoring
Protocol.docx" for more guidance) in the sub-folder (e.g., 100EK113).
You can un-tag a photo by hitting the "Shift + X" keys on your keyboard
to remove the temporary tag.

15\. When you complete a sub-folder, hit the "Shift" + "Q" keys on your
keyboard to open the tagged Thumbnails window. *Note: You must open the
tagged Thumbnails window before moving to another sub-folder.*

16\. The "Thumbnails" window displays all of the tagged photos. You must
first select-all of the photos by clicking the first photo, hold down
the "Shift" key, and then select the last photo, or hold down the
"Control" key and hit "A" on your keyboard to select all. You screen
should resemble the screenshot below.

![](./docs/protocols/media/image15.jpeg){width="5.580431977252843in"
height="3.507445319335083in"}

17\. Save these tagged photos as a text file by clicking the "File"
option in the upper-left side of the window, and then "Save selected
file names as TXT".

![](./docs/protocols/media/image16.jpeg){width="5.6120778652668415in"
height="3.0554647856517936in"}

18\. Save this text file into the assignment folder (e.g., the
assignment folder is BGW_09072020_09242020 in screenshot below). Use the
following naming scheme:

BGW_09072020_09242020_100EK113_subjects.txt

Where "BGW" is the sitecode, "09072020" is the date the camera was
deployed, "09242020" is the date of the last photo in the folder,
"100EK113" is the name of the sub-folder you sorted, and "subjects"
indicates that data in the text file is only photos that contain
subjects (e.g., animals, humans).

19\. Tag all the photos with subjects in each sub-folder, save these
tagged photos as a text file in the assignment folder. Do this for all
of the sub-folders (e.g., 100EK113, 101EK113, 102EK113) in the
assignment folder (e.g., BGW_09072020_09242020). When finished, the
assignment folder should contain only text files (see screenshot below).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image17.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.811111111111111in"}

20\. If you sort a sub-folder (e.g., 100EK113) that *does not* contain
subjects, create an empty text file by right-clicking on the an empty
space within the assignment folder, then selecting "New" and then "Text
Document". Name this empty text file using the same naming scheme
(replacing the name of the assignment and sub-folder to the assignment
and subfolder you are working on), except add "no_subjects" to indicate
that you sorted through the folder but did not detect any subjects. This
is important to document that you did not skip or miss a sub-folder.

BGW_09072020_09242020_100EK113_no_subjects.txt

![](./docs/protocols/media/image18.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.657638888888889in"}

# Uploading Text Files to Basecamp

21\. Compress the assignment folder (containing all of the text files)
using the built-in Windows compression utility. Right click on the
folder, select "Send To", and then "Compressed (zipped) folder. This
will help keep all of the text files together as a single file (instead
of as folder with many files).

![](./docs/protocols/media/image19.png){width="5.859595363079615in"
height="3.2960225284339457in"}

22\. The final step in sorting photos is to upload the subject text
files to Basecamp. Under the Camera Studies Ã  To-dos section, find the
folder that you sorted (e.g., BKS_08132019_09132019) and upload the
compressed folder (.zip file) under that assignment (see screenshot
below).

![Graphical user interface, application, Teams Description automatically
generated](./docs/protocols/media/image20.png){width="5.7360859580052495in"
height="3.089886264216973in"}
